# Gut-Met-MR

**Abstract**:
The causal mediation effects of metabolites between gut microbiota and cognitive phenotypes remain unclear. Guided by the gut-brain axis mechanism, this study employed systematic Mendelian Randomization (MR) to investigate these mediation pathways and their implications for functional food development. Univariate MR analysis was performed to estimate the causality of 211 gut microbiota (n=18,340) and 452 serum metabolites (n=7,824) on general cognitive (n=257,700), non-cognitive (n=510,795), and specific cognitive phenotypes (n≈2,500) using genome-wide association studies data. Inverse-variance weighted estimation was adopted as the primary method, with MR sensitivity analyses performed to complement results. Metabolic pathway analysis was employed to enrich metabolic profiles, while two-step MR was used to screen mediation pathways. Seven causal associations between microbiotas or metabolites and cognitive phenotypes (FDR<0.05) were identified. Increased abundance of the class Clostridia was associated with better cognitive traits (OR=1.12, 95%CI=1.05-1.20, P=8.25×10-4), with myristate, highly abundant in dairy products, acting as mediator. Six significant metabolic pathways were enriched, including alpha-linolenic acid and linoleic acid metabolism, highlighting the potential role of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids in cognitive health. We further identified five significant mediation pathways from the gut microbiota to cognitive phenotypes through metabolites. Notably, homostachydrine (47.6%) was found to mediate the proportion of the impact of genus Turicibacter on emotion recognition (indirect effect OR=1.13, 95%CI=1.02-1.24, P=7.30*10-3). This study provides evidence for causal relationships between gut microbiota, serum metabolites, and cognitive function, supporting the gut-brain axis mechanism. Our findings suggest potential targets for functional food development and personalized nutrition to improve cognitive health.
